way
Al righty let's slowly get started so
second talk of today will be ziko couter
uh ziko has worked on pretty much all
parts of the deep learning pipeline
anywhere from architectures improved
algorithms robustness adversarial
examples
generalization um on top of all of the
best paper and test of time Awards and
everything else he somehow manages to
find the time to be the newly appointed
head of the machine learning department
and on the board of directors of open AI
I'm convinced he doesn't sleep even
though he says otherwise but uh anyways
ziko please take it away thanks very
much
Andre all right it is great to be here
um I actually CH so so if you check the
schedule today for the for the talks you
notice my talk title is TBD I apologize
matus I did never send actually a title
um but it actually worked out really
well for the best for me because I
decided on the Uber ride here I was
going to change which of the talks I was
going to give so I'm decided to give a
different talk today I think given the
the theme I was going to talk about
adversarial robustness um which I give a
lot of talks on those are all online
though so you can just watch them if you
want to
um I want to talk about instead I think
some work that ties in a little bit
better with the themes of this
particular set of workshops um which is
about hallucinations in generative Ai
and I'll Define what I mean by that I'll
also try to stay out of the way a little
bit from this I like to walk around as I
talk um I want to start off by saying
though that this talk is is it's
essentially exploratory it's very new
work um I've given this talk one time
before and this is the second time and
um it's also more trying to demonstrate
a or or or show some kind of behavior
that I think deserves a bit more study
rather than really explain anything in
detail so it's going to be very light on
math very heavy on pictures and sort of
plots and such um but hopefully we'll
get at sort of interesting effects that
we see kind of in in modern generative
AI um I also you know you probably can
tell by the title that I use the word
generative AI here rather than machine
learning or statistics or something like
this um that's intentional I'm as those
who know me you know I I maybe three
years ago I would have been more well
suited to this to this particular uh
seminar series but now I'm a a scaling
maximalist when it comes to AI so I'm
you know gone to the dark side um but
the goal here to a certain extent is
that I do want to try
to make some connections between these
two these two worlds
and and hopefully argue that some of the
problems that we see in what I will
broadly call kind of modern you know
gener of AI is are are actually due to
in some cases rather simple estimation
errors and you know people sort of more
familiar with these topics have actually
a lot to contribute to them and that's
really the purpose of this talk please
do ask questions I do not think I have
uh 75 minutes worth of content though I
can certainly talk that long if people
want me to but I'd rather uh have
questions and have some some interaction
so to start off with this is work really
with a master student zuk uh one of my
PhD students pret as well as there's a
second section that I might or might not
get to um very brief from one of my
students
Andy and um many other collaborators as
well but these are Le the students that
have worked on
it uh all right so so let's let's jump
in and I want to talk about why
hallucinations are so interesting
so um again I'm talking about generative
AI here basically meaning llms and
diffusion models uh so chat gbt or Dolly
stable diffusion things like
this and if you've spent any time with
these systems you know that they
basically just make stuff up a lot right
they just say things that are false um
in fact I think there's a great quote
that sort of summarizes this because
they're generative models they don't
really have facts or knowledge bases of
the world and so it's actually very
reasonable to say that all AI
Generations are hallucinations some just
happen to be true I don't know how she
said this quote so I asked Ai and of
course like all famous quotes someday
this will be attributed to to Einstein
um but I want to dive into some of these
a little bit and sort of show you the
nature and characteristic of these
things and why I think it's a really
interesting it's an interesting
topic um so here here is and I just
mentioned these these examples are from
older models so more recent models
hallucinations are are a massive problem
in the Practical use of AI and I'll I'll
mention this again a second
the fact that these models just say
things that are wrong you've probably
all heard in the news right where people
use them for legal cases and stuff and
there are fake legal cases it imagines
and you can't do that as a lawyer right
um but I want to show some examples of
hallucinations that these models do and
kind of also give you a sense of why
they might make these might make these
errors so again these are from older
models so so because there such a
problem a lot of systems have really
tried to put in place mechanisms to
prevent this on top of just the raw
based models themselves they have other
sort of checks for these things because
they're such a problem um and so there
is the situation is improved a lot but I
would actually argue from a modeling and
and sort of basic technology standpoint
the problem is very much still
there so um a year or so ago I asked
chat gbt as you do to write a biography
of yourself uh so I asked it to write a
biography of me I am a good example for
this particular failure mode because I
am on the internet uh so the you know I
have a web page obviously my Webb page
was scraped by these models when they
were they were sort of building
themselves but I don't have a Wikipedia
page so there's no sort of ground Truth
uh knowledge about my sort of
biographical details that are out there
and so what it says is that ziko cter is
a prominent computer scientist a machine
learning exp a machine learning
researcher that's yeah that's that's
true right one for one so far uh he was
born in Brazil in 1986 and grew up in
new yor de Janeiro um that is not true
that is entirely false
uh but you wouldn't know that unless you
didn't know me right uh so so no yep no
um bachelor's degree from the federal
University of Rio De Janeiro in 2007
also not true um and PhD in computer
science from car melon also not true
though it's getting more correct right
maybe a little bit closer uh and then it
says you know I'm on the faculty of
univers school computer or school
computer science that's that's true so
you know two for five or so now and I'm
a co-founder of a startup
acon also made and does not exist as a
startup
um I assume most people sort of are
familiar with basic idea of how llms
work they predict one word at a time
they predict sort of the most likely
words and sample from that distribution
um the reason why it does this why these
things come out is that uh for those
that that maybe don't know the don't
don't have not heard of these people I
was named after a Brazilian soccer
player actually football player um who
was big during the uh 82 World Cup and
so if your name is
SEO the most likely year you were born
is around 1983 to
1986 um and most likely you were born in
Brazil and then if you were born in
Brazil and you're an academic you're
probably went to the University of Rio
De
Janeiro and then it starts you know
again going back to sort of facts it has
so maybe I got my PhD I probably got it
from Carnegie Mel and stuff like
that so it makes total sense why it's
doing this
again just happens to be
wrong
um here's another example I really like
this is a meme that's been gone around
for a while um AI is known to be
threatening to replace a whole lot of of
domains and of course people say you
know AI role plays photographers and
then AI accepting the job has a whole
bunch of hands uh shaking themselves
that have more fingers than are normally
common on hands or different
configurations of hands and arms than
are common in the
world um and I mean these are awesome
and I think actually in some sense sort
of artistically hallucinations make for
the best examples of AI art in a lot of
ways um but I think that there's there
is really sort of a a fundamental
connection here to what I'll broadly
call generalization but I'm actually not
going to use that word too much here I
think when it comes to llm what it means
to generalize is is is honestly not as
clear as in other settings but speaking
at a very high level I think it's fair
to say that if we expect these models to
generate anything outside their training
data then in some sense we it might be
reasonable to expect that they kind of
have to place some probability Mass on
statements that are not true right these
systems are are not they don't have a
model of the world uh underneath them
they don't have sort of detailed
conceptions of what's true and false and
some knowledge based they're just
statistical machines on some level I
mean to be clear I think they're also
intelligent uh I I do believe that it's
one of the most amazing scientific
discoveries uh is the fact that if you
take these statistical machines and
iterate them you get intelligent
responses out that's incredible um but
it does seem to a certain extent that
yes if you are generating text that goes
in any way beyond what you have seen
before you have to have some Mass on
things that are not true so maybe
hallucinations are just a fact of life
when it comes to AI
models at the same time though I think
it's also fair to say that this is the
single biggest obstacle we have to a
more widespread adoption of generative
AI right
because you can't use it for legal
applications or arguably if was going to
make up case names and things like this
right um Nat's wondering about this well
to be clear I use generative AI all the
time for everything I do
um coding and such right is the thing I
use it for most so so yes you could
argue that this
is
surmountable but I do think that we
don't want these things we would like to
minimize this as much as possible okay
maybe a more fair statement okay
yeah human absolutely humans make
mistakes on H all the time
um somehow I think these are a different
character though there there is a there
is a way in which we have a bit more
recourse I would argue to sort of facts
in the world and things like this than
than some of these models but maybe
that's just a matter of their of their
deployment to be clear as I said at the
beginning I I am a scaling maximalist I
I believe that these things are going to
ultimately um reach the height that we
are that we are thinking they might
right now um but I think this is still a
practical
problem so what I want to and and to a
certain extent of course this is a
problem of course uh all these
generative models they're going to I
mean this is true they're going to put
proberly Mass on things that are not
true because they don't have a model of
the world they don't have sort of fact
databases in some sense but what I want
to try to argue today and give some
hints of in in a very informal way and
really I hope to ask just provide kind
of a background that would lay a
foundation for more work by this
audience or others is what I want to
convey is that this is not the only
cause for hallucinations in generative
AI models and in particular what I mean
by that is that there are many cases
where to a certain extent and I'm again
I'm anthropomorphizing here a bit but
generative
models in some cases some of the
hallucinations we see are not
unavoidable in the sense that I sort of
mentioned before there are actually
cases where the model very much knows
that it's hallucinating or in other
words there are statistical differences
between the generation of hallucinations
and the generation of factual responses
or good images with many fingers and
images with the correct number of
fingers on a hand these are in many
cases things that the models actually do
know and the generation of
hallucinations is a sampling artifact
it's about how we sample from these
things given their model of the world
and not an inherent problem of the
models
themselves and I don't think all
hallucinations are in this category but
I think that some are and that's what I
want to try to argue
today okay so with that is the
background the outline of this talk is
going to be the following I'm going to
talk first and and to be honest I might
spend possibly all the time on this
first one this next one is very brief
and it's more more just sort of an
informal Exposition um I want to spend
some more time talking about the the
first one which is understanding
hallucinations in diffusion models um
using a a phenomenon that we call mode
inter or via a phenomenon we call mode
interpolation um I'm then going to talk
about if there's time maybe a little bit
about identifying and mitigating
hallucinations in
llms and I'll end kind of reiterating my
sales pitch about the the the value of
investigating these phenomenon from more
cical perspective
uh at the
end all right any questions before I
jump right
in okay please do interrupt and ask
questions during it it will go very fast
if we don't have any questions so I'm
sure there will
be all right this this uh paper and it's
really the the main thing I'm going to
talk about um this is about from from a
recent paper we have called
understanding hallucinations in
diffusion models through mode
interpolation that's very similar to my
title there uh this was uh posted we
posted this on on archive a couple
months
ago all right so first of all I want to
Define hallucinations and I'm going to
use a very informal definition here but
I but it's just sort of hopefully clear
what I mean by this um if p is our
distribution of the real data and Q is
some distribution that we sample from to
generate
samples um again when the when you're
when you're data are things when your
data are things like all images that
there are
I know it's impossible to actually
characterize these distributions I'm not
going to really try to talk about any
this in any meaningful way I would argue
um but I do want to have some sort of
notion of these things here so we can
Define what we mean by hallucinations um
I would look to everyone else if they're
interested in this to start start
formalizing this more but basically a
hallucination to be blunt is any point
sampled from our sort of data gener
distribution q that has that is not in
support of P so it's something that
would never occur in p and I do really
want to use the the word zero there it
should be something that would never
actually occur you could also replace
that with you know the probability being
less or the density being less than some
infantes small quantity you know less
than the atoms in the universe or
something like that but let's just let's
just go with this for now there this
will never happen in real images
whatever the distribution of real images
means I'm I'm I'm soping that all under
the rug here I'm being very
informal and what the key question I'm
going to ask is uh what is the nature
of this set of points what is the nature
of points that in this case diffusion
models typically hallucinate
about and to um to sort of motivate this
I'm going to use some simple examples
here that we constructed when we started
investigating this
phenomena and the first data set I'm
going to use to motivate hallucinations
and later sort of to analyze some of our
of our uh hopeful understanding of this
is a data set that we call the simple
shapes data set and what this is is this
is a data set of um black and white
images with shapes the shapes are
triangles squares and pentagons and
they're always in this configuration
they're never rotated or anything it's
just this kind of triangle a square and
this Pentagon and in particular the
triangles always occur at most one zero
or one triangles occur in this region of
the image zero or one squares occur in
this region of the image and zero or one
pentagons occur this region of the image
so right so they they could be anywhere
in those regions um anywhere there and
they will either occur or they won't
there's only ever zero or one this is a
well- defined distribution now it's
actually discreet because images are
discreet but this is a well-defined
distribution we can exactly talk about
support things of possible possible
points um and we can talk about points
that are that are imaginary in some
sense so if we take data from this and
take a the order of tens of thousands
examples here and train a diffusion
model uh I I will talk in a second about
what diffusion models are I'll be do it
very briefly because hopefully most
people are at least roughly familiar
with the fusion models these are the
models behind things like like Dolly and
stable diffusion and flux is the latest
one um they're models that generate
images essentially by uh creating a
noise distribution of of of samples that
interpolate between the image and noise
and then trying to essentially predict
the image from noise as meaningless as
that might sound uh they sort of Define
a distribution in a way that you can at
least generate images from from these
initial noise
distributions okay so you take you take
images like this you train an
off-the-shelf diffusion model and for
the most part you get images that
actually fit this that that are exactly
from this distribution so we have a you
know a a a model that is sufficient to
exactly capture this kind of stuff and
then they capture Crisp Images and
things like that the images look correct
they're they're they're all good
but occasionally you get something weird
so even if I'm just giving it data like
this
occasionally you get points that have
two shapes in the same region they're
usually in the correct region but
they're just two
sometimes it's kind of weird you've
never seen that new data set before I
mean you could argue you know this is a
big distribution there's a lot of things
you haven't seen in your in your data
set before but this is a very particular
failure mode that they have they
synthesize two shapes
sometimes that's what we see it's a
small portion it's on the order of you
know 1 to 2% or so but there's a notable
percentage of sampled images that have
two shapes yeah does the percentage go
down if if you increase yes if you
increase more and more and more it will
go down but it will never go away there
will always be some then you could argue
just doesn't know if the training set
has very rarely two shapes or like
that's very true yeah yeah so I mean
right so this with high dimensional this
these are all images now right so so how
do you know this but what I will say is
that this seems to
be it doesn't make many other mistakes
it doesn't make circles ever it doesn't
make you know squares that are
rotated um for the most part this things
exactly right just sometimes there are
two shapes and to be clear I don't think
I'm going to resolve this question about
why this is the error it makes these
these these operate in sort of
representational space that's very you
know inscrutable to us
but I think it's very interesting that
this happens and this happens quite
repeatedly this is the mistake that they
make you know if this is a diffusion
model specific thing or Gans like to do
similar things we didn't train Gans this
particular example um I I'm going to
talk just about Fusion models because in
fact the the the failure mode I will
talk about is specific to diffusion
models so let's just focus on diffusion
models for now I suspect actually Gans
St would have different failure modes
most
likely
yeah this is always happen size of the
training set um it does seem to happen a
lot um from and I will I will argue why
given okay so you could argue that in
the limit of truly infinite data you
will get you will get better um but I
think this actually this is a matter of
the representations of our functions
that we use to approximate these things
that will cause them so I suspect this
will I suspect even with effectively
infinite data this would this would
stick around yeah this would still
happen you said
data right try you could try for a
smaller example you know smaller
Dimension every configuration let's talk
about that because I'm going to go with
a smaller example in a second and I'll
I'll talk about why I think this is
still going to be present even with
every configuration possible
yeah beond no it's always at most three
because there's only
one oh um I think I think likely it does
I actually don't haven't checked that
let's take the famous example of hands
too um if you take it a data set of just
hands of human hands um there are hands
that have not uh Five Fingers of course
but in this data set this particular
data set of 11k hands every hand has has
Five Fingers um and what you get if you
train a diffusion model on this data set
is you get um mostly hands with five
fingers and occasionally hands with more
than five fingers or less than five
fingers so thumbs coming out of the side
of the hands and things like this um
this is also I mean I don't I don't even
know how to think about this because I
mean you could argue that there this
this is in the distribution there are
hands with more than five fingers but
they're never in this data set so what's
the real distribution right it's
consider a very fundamental issue of
sort of
what what do we mean about distribution
when when it's of of of an object like a
hand that we you know think about as
being a physical object in the world
but which we can never characterize all
possible images of hands
um but having said that all this is a
very sort of immediate problem and a
very present problem in that a a very
high fraction of images relative to to
the to the what's sort of been seen in
training data and this is holds true
also for for images generated by larger
defusion models have incorrect number of
or a nonf number of fingers in their
data yeah you'll get yeah you will that
sometimes too so sometimes you'll have
three fingers also yeah more is somehow
more common it's much more common to
have more than five fingers than less
than five
fingers or because it seems like very
natural yeah yeah so so what I'm going
to argue is that this effect is at least
partially expl laed by the diffusion
model I don't think that's the only
cause because I think with other this
problem particular there the hands with
more fingers that that one you see in
all generative models but what I will
say is I think there is a and I don't
know the mechanism behind all these
things nor do I think we can even this
is why you know my first title was
understanding a bit about
hallucinations
um I will offer you a mechanism that I
think is at least partially the cause
for this in diffusion models that I
think they there is some hint that it
might actually be behind not all of
these but some of them and so how
General this is that's we don't know uh
how generic this is rather we don't
really
know yeah said that the models
mostly yeah I think that's true for Gen
but does that still hold here yes so I
will I I will argue with you that models
know that these are
hallucinations
yeah and I'll say what I mean by that in
a
second all right so before though so
these are these are the motivating
examples we will come back to these
examples by the way because in some
sense what really matters in this
context is not um sort of how well we
can uh
or what will matter here is not how well
diffusion models model the toy settings
I'm about to describe but how well they
actually model these kind of things this
is what people to apply the fusion
models to so I will come back to these
later but before we come back to them
let me give an even simpler example of
just a mixture of three
gaussians so let's instead take data
like this so this is a mixture of three
gaussians and we're sampling from three
gaussians with identical means and sorry
identical variances um with mean values
1 two
three if you train a diffusion model on
this what would you expect to
see what do you think it's going to look
like any guesses
I thought it would look like I thought
it would ignore one of the modes is what
I thought
originally any guesses of that obviously
it's wrong because I wouldn't be asking
otherwise but what what was that
n did I say did I say more what if more
mod it ignore I see yeah yeah so so
maybe right so maybe it'll ignore some
of the modes yeah if there's if there's
25 modes we'll have that slide in a
second actually uh
yeah um maybe yeah yeah
I'll reveal it so we train an off the
shelf diffusion model on this um and you
get data like
this so it puts probability mass in
between modes for no no obvious reason
yes sem the way it's constructed I me
it's hard to really zero off between
them uh I wouldn't I I don't think it's
actually hard I think it's for very
specific reason maybe it's obvious to
you it was not obvious to me this would
happen maybe I'll show the next slide
next slide makes this even less obvious
to me what's happening here but I'll but
but uh um yeah we we'll we'll talk about
in a second yeah you like original
distribution looks like it's trunky as J
it's not this is actually from actual
samples this this is a log density too
right so this is the log density so it's
actually quadratics around the space
what I'm plotting here is the actual
histogram of data points the there is a
density here but it's it's it's it's you
know less than number of atoms in the
universe at the lowest point um it's not
you know the the fraction should not be
10 to neg five there as you see this is
a huge overestimate of the actual
density
there okay so let me show another
example because I think it is more it is
maybe more instructive about what's what
why I think this is weird not just oh
obviously is what the future models
would
do this I also expect put a lot of mass
yeah okay that's that's maybe correct
here um I think this example is actually
more interesting um but even though I'm
going to mainly explain it through the
three the three
gaussians so now let's talk about a 2d
grid of gaussians of 25 gaussians um and
I also thought it would drop some of the
modes I thought that would be the most
likely outcome if you train a diffusion
model on this what you get is samples
look like
this so what it's doing is it's taking
nearby modes really the neighbors nearby
neighbors of modes oddly not diagonal
neighbors so it's in some sense like
just the nearest modes in some in some
space in some definition of a metric and
connecting them with some positive
probability Mass between the two yeah I
mean people did this with Gans like a
while back as well it's just because as
say if you have like a push forward of a
gion to really separate them you get an
extremely non lip smell and that is
just hard so but aan does it differently
so so this happens differently in a gan
this example and the reason why with
this example happens differently is that
in Gans you actually do get some
properly massive in these centers here
it's not so well aligned with these
things um I don't disagree that it is
about the lipti justness of the of the
function we're going to talk exactly
about what's what's happening here and
why that's exactly the cause of it um
but you get different effects with Gans
than than just these um some of it
similar but it's not identical to this
how much does it depend on what
architecture you put into either the
diffusion mod like so I think it does so
so this I mean to be clear this is 2D so
this is just an MLP that we're using
here um what we use in the actual def in
for the shapes examples as those are all
units um and I think it doesn't really
depend there now obviously what happens
there is more complex because what it
means to sort of interpolate between
modes is is very different um but but I
think I'm going to argue why I think
this is actually a similar effect yeah
so you said you mean like a modern unit
with an attention ined so yeah the oh
I'm sorry yeah yes so matus said uh when
I'm talking about the other models that
I'm using for the other examples I said
that we use a unet architecture to do
the diffusion there um and yes it's a
modern unet this is off the-shelf one of
the uh ddpm or ADM models that we use so
it's sort of a standard a standard unit
for that yeah everything's standard
there was one more question I saw over
there but uh yeah sure so I guess the
number of parameters the actual number
of parameters that you need to learn the
actual distribution is lower than the
other one right because just need to
learn the I don't know mean and averages
of gos over their oh yeah yeah so so I
mean as with as with all uh deep
networks we are wildly overp
parameterizing the the the the our
generative
distribution I mean you but it still
works right yes of course you can fit a
mixture of gaussians to this and it'll
work fine you'll fit it exactly um you
can't fit images that way right so so
people these these methods for better or
worse are the method of choice for
fitting real high dimensional
distributions and so I think it's quite
instructive to look at them even in this
low dimensional case because what
they're doing here I think is is
somewhat
interesting I ask
yeah
yeah uh no it doesn't so that it's not
about the denoising itself it's about
the underlying representations which
I'll talk about in a second so so no
matter how many diffusion steps you use
you'll still get this so this is
independent of the number of diffusion
steps you use
yeah all right so the the the phenomenon
that we're trying to claim is sort of
at be behind this here and this has been
seen in other models as well to a
certain extent but I think it does
appear more prevalent I would say in in
diffusion models than I've seen in other
models um this what we're calling mode
interpolation so the idea is it does
appear that most of the hallucinated
mass to use for lack of a better term
here lies in this interesting set where
um Z is a point in Q that's not in
support of
P this tends to happen in regions where
uh there are some there are two points
there will be two points that are that's
in the support of P these are in fact
two sort of points that are neighboring
in their modes and then Z ends up being
a combination between the two of these
um it seems like most of the mass that
we see that's
hallucinated falls into that
category now the question is sort of
that we have is why why is this
happening in the particular case of
diffusion models and and why does it not
depend on things like the number of
sampling steps you use the number of
longin steps you use in creating your
sampler and things like this I think
it's actually a pretty straightforward
reason at least in the gausian case why
this is happening here just like this
but I'm going to try to try to explain
that now
yeah
yeah yeah so so we have some other
examples of this too in in the paper um
yes if you as you move modes further
apart you get less points between them
um and it falls off pretty quickly which
is why you don't see points that are
sort of in these stuff you in the
intering points there but it's also I
mean it's actually very hard to
say precisely what for any given
configuration what the samp you know
where these things would lie um
hopefully if I describe kind of what's
the phenomenon behind this it'll make a
lot it'll make a lot more sense and then
yeah we go from
there
yeah I don't quite get the expanation
why maybe given it I haven't given it
yeah why you don't why I don't expect
things there I haven't given that yet no
yeah there's a reason for that there is
a reason that but I this one actually
won't cover too much I'm going to go
back to the 1D case this is more of an
illustration um but I think it falls out
for the exact same reason that I'm going
to give the other
one all right so before I do that I want
to talk a little bit about diffusion
models um this is going to be super
basic uh I don't want to get into all
the things there's yeah
questions more in general you expect
that in any even in much higher
Dimensions or is it because it is let's
talk about higher dimensions in a little
bit obviously when you have images the
hallucinations are not smooth
interpolations between these images
right they're not it's not like you have
a fuzzy a fuzzy finger on one hand um
what's happening there I pre this a
little bit what's happening there is
that the interpolation is in the latent
space of the of the unet somewhere um
and the question I would have is you
know is there anything about the
phenomena that translates over to those
cases and I think I think so I think
there is and I'll I'll come back to that
at the end because I think these
phenomena are not entirely separate I
think there's a connection between them
but I fully agree that entirely
understanding this phenomenon in higher
dimensional images is harder
much harder to really
understand
yeah do experiment where inre theze yes
we do have
this yeah fact that because if you say
if you increase the distance you see
less between the farther
ones right yes you see less between them
if you increase the distance yes mean
bys have to yeah
yeah yeah what I what I was say that is
there doesn't appear so for for All
sample sizes and and I don't so
admittedly we have not looked at the
rates of fall-off for this yet as as it
falls off with sample size um what I
will say is this
phenomena persists with very large
sample sizes even for very low
dimensional problems to the point where
any reasonable estimator should not make
this mistake um I mean here right you
have on the orders of tens of thousands
of of of samples here in a in a 1D
problem uh I would don't think this this
is this is some failure mode of the
estimator slash slash generation Pro
generating process not some notion of
statistical uncertainty about the about
the points
yeah okay um let me talk about diffusion
models briefly so diffusion model
basically works by modeling a smooth
mixture um which we call PT that's
essentially a mixture between a uniform
distribution um doesn't always have to
be zero mean it can be placed wherever
in fact we place it you know wide enough
that it sort of covers the whole space
but it's essentially a a mixture between
the original data distribution and a
noise distribution and so you sort of
mix between these two um literally just
sort of interpolating between one and
the other you shrink down your you know
your original dependence on x0 and add
some noise
and what these models do at least under
one interpretation and there's lots of
interpretations of how the fusion models
work but under one interpretation what
they're doing is they're approximating
the score function at every point along
this this smooth noise interpolated
distribution the score function is just
the gradient of the the log of the the
distribution
there and the way that diffusion models
work is we model our distribution Q by
essentially approximating the score
function using a neural network right so
we just use it rather than we don't know
the true score dist score function
arguably sometimes this is easier to
model than the than than the density and
if you have this you can actually have a
process with lunch dynamics that draw
samples from it so what the fusion
models do is they try to directly model
this thing um using score matching it's
a sort of common a common method that's
been known for a while for this and what
they do is they then they produce a
sequence of estimates from some big time
usually called T Big T to t0 and then t0
is sort of your final estimate of the of
your image that's
my sort of content free two-minute
explanation of of the fusion models at
least in the score distribution sort of
in the the score function uh way of
interpreting them um and importantly I
mean this this actually kind of an aside
here it doesn't really matter except
that we're going to use this later on um
in addition to producing kind of this
estimate of of dno samples from you know
Pure Noise at this time to to uh your
image at the last time again or a data
point if you're to 1D case uh they also
always produce an estimate of the of the
final State as well so at every point
when you're producing an image with a
diffusion model you have both an
estimate of the current denoise image as
well as an estimate of what you think
the original image looks like and then
you can map between these two to sort of
get a sense of how you uh or rather you
can use both these two to sort of get a
sense of how you progress along your Den
noising
chain okay so that's that's sort of the
basic um insight into into into into uh
what's what's going on here and now I
want to kind of get to the the punch
line uh which is sort of what is
happening and it's actually very it's
exactly I think what was already
mentioned here about what's happening to
make these things happen um I realiz I
had this animation wrong so don't don't
read this
yet um but the the the issue the reason
why diffusion models put this mass in
the middle you can it's I mean for the
2D for this ond example it's very
obvious why this is happening actually
you can just extract it directly um the
problem is that the real score function
is discontinuous so at so the score
function the real score function looks
like this um these aren't great dis
displays here but for this distribution
here the real score function looks like
this um because basically if you take
the the log of of this thing I mean this
is the log of it if you take the
derivative of this you'll have three
decreasing uh functions that do a
extreme jump between modes there right
so the real score function especially as
you get the lower time steps that's
where this is the actual data
distribution and not a a smooth one uh
is
discontinuous neural networks we all
know are very bad representing
discontinuous functions so when you try
to s so this is the real score function
when you try to estimate the score
function using a neural network as
trained by a diffusion model you get
this function instead and so it's just
going to be a smooth version of this
right we're not adding the regularizers
here this is just the nature of gradient
descent applied to a neural network is
going to create a smooth approximation
of this thing and when I run Lev
sampling on this
function rather than this one these
Peaks aren't high enough they're not
pushing my samples enough toward toward
this point here or this region here
where you want to be and so you're going
to get points that lie in the
intermediate spaces here and that's all
it is it's nothing actually mysterious
in this case it's very obvious why this
is happening once you look into it um we
know the analytic form of the Tre score
function we could sample according to
this sample according to this when we
sample according to this no matter how
many sampling steps you have or how many
supports your chain this is just the
wrong score function and so you're going
to get samples that have points in
between the
modes
yeah even if I to try to fit let's say m
[Music]
using and I start the uniform prior the
draws are coming from like a mixture
still have very similar things right
because because you will because you
know you start with uniform you're only
trying to decrease I see okay so so so
right so this has do with the sampling
process so in the samp so this is not
quite true so if you do the sampling
process where you start with uniform
noise run lunch Dynamics but use the
true score function you will not get
this effect here because the true score
function has enough sort of mass and the
correct derivatives to push you
correctly into these regions so I mean
the the way lement Dynamics work right
is you basically you you find wherever
you are and you take a little step in
this gradient direction that pushes you
and you add a little bit of noise right
um that's how Len Dynamics work to sort
of sample from this thing so if you use
the true score function you don't have
this problem you have sufficient sort of
discontinuities here to push you toward
the right spot yeah I Wasing to what you
learn yes yeah right yeah
yeah I a very simple setting where like
say I have like mixture of three point
masks right and if I start trying to
learn it using I see so
right don't
have I mean I mean I
iation I I think you're not I think
that's there's definitely an aspect of
that that's that's correct but I just
want to empe we're not learning the
density here and that's actually quite
important we are learning the score
function right so learning density is
very hard and even if you have a density
You' learned sampling from it is hard
right so this is this is why people
don't use density estimation for the
most part um in in these networks
they've settled on a huge variety of
alternative models that don't require
density estimation basically right so
we've kind of uh racked our brains to
think of alternative things we could do
that are not density estimation in all
generative modeling for images and stuff
like that um for images here not not
Auto regressive You could argue that's
just density estimation but but this but
but we're not estimated density we're
estimating the score function the reason
why we do that is you can draw samples
from the score function and have a nice
estimator for that that without having
to sort of model the dentity at all even
the unnormalized dentity
okay uniform noise to learning
function okay yeah maybe maybe we talk
offline yes so you're you know
identifying that neural networks can't
represent discontinuous fun functions
can square function that's why this is
happening I suggest that at least in a
simple example just as a thought
experiment we could use some other
estimator to score function that sure
discontinuities but kep the long steps
what they are yeah you guys tried that
so I mean we've tried just using the
real score function that obviously works
we haven't thought of other estimators
we're trying to sort of gleam insight
into what happens when you do use neural
networks for this I think and we haven't
done this yet to be clear I think what
would be more interesting would be to
think about modifying the sampling
procedure in a way that accounts for the
inherent smoothing of this score
function to sort of overcorrect for it I
think that would be the right because I
mean it's not bad here I mean yes you
have a little bit of sort of an attract
attractive point there but you'll get
out of it with with with noise too I
think if we I think potentially again
haven't done it yet we'll talk about
what we do in a second sort of to to
account for this
um the thing we have done well we'll
talk about we do in a second but I think
it would be I think a more interesting
thing maybe would be to see if we can
modify the sampling process in a way
that overcorrects for the inherent
smoothing of these functions to account
for that sort of inaccuracy that might
that in my mind might be a more fruitful
Direction but we haven't gone that route
yet at
all um I'm also curious about like
because if in if there are like smaller
modes wouldn't that then remove them
away um so so yeah there are problems of
I mean people call them know mode
collapse and stuff like that so when you
have very small amounts you know modes
with very small amount of data to be
honest people do worry about this
happening but what we see is this is
actually not the problem in practice for
diffusion models the problem is exactly
that you are over representing points
that are within that are between
modes so in some it's very apparent wise
is happening and by the way in the 2D
case what you get is just the the
landscape of that neural network tends
to be such that you get connectivity in
the path between two modes that are
nearby and not between diagonal modes
and for there I would just throw up my
hands and say this is just a a function
of the nature of of how neural networks
end up approximating the data it's not
due to the like the rotational
invariance like that if you rotate these
points you get the same connection only
to the nearby modes so I would say we
don't I'm not going to give you a great
answer to that I don't think it's going
to be super satisfying other than just
to say these discontinuities here happen
more between neighboring no or sorry
this this smoothing here happens more
between neighboring no uh neighboring
modes in the 2D case than it does
between diagonally adjacent nodes that
do good upate one point and then see
whether then diagonal point will be the
nearest like um yeah so we've done a
bunch of things that are sort of similar
to that where we jiggle them around a
bit stuff like that um maybe we can it
it doesn't look like it's a big jump
there's no sharp jump in it it just you
know yes when you move it it connects to
its nearest neighbors a little bit less
and then eventually it falls off when
it's the distance to diagonal I don't
think it's anything that deep to be
honest I think it's just sort of the
these you know this oops uh I do
there this function just happens to when
you fit a network to the score function
here it happens to sort of smooth more
in these gaps than in this Gap yeah
isn't this 2D example is just a product
of two of the the just the one example
uh yes but again there's nothing there's
nothing inherent about the did I that's
weird text behind it
now
um this text that's strange um if I take
this the exact same example I I didn't
put it in my slides here take exact same
example just rotate it like this so now
it's not at least independent variables
anymore you get the exact same thing as
this just rotated this let's say
compression wise the best way to express
your data is the two yeah I mean so so
you could argue that this is in fact a
product distribution but you can make
variants that are not symmetric in this
way and then and they still will have
sort of it will still interpolate
between nearest modes if you kind of
Jiggles a little bit and stuff like that
but I I I I don't want to go too deep
into that because there may be effects
we haven't seen that we're sort of not I
don't really know about but it's not I
don't think it's sort of a notion of
sort of these are only true of product
distributions for
example yeah yes this is our MLPs
ension
yeah okay um all right but there is one
thing there is some sort of a Saving
Grace here and this is what I mean by
the fact that um the fusion models know
when they're
hallucinating because if you look at not
just the final sample but if you look at
the trajectory of
samples that created your diffusion sort
of set for any given uh
generation something very interesting
happens right because if you are kind of
stuck in one of these over smooth
regions what you will tend to do uh and
if you end up sort of wind up more in
this space than everywhere else what you
will tend to do basically is you will
tend to bounce around more than if you
get kind of in one of these mode and
stay there
um you tend to
basically your your your sampling
trajectory of your diffusion process is
has has much higher variance and just to
sort of di that home I'm going to show
this plot
here so here I'm showing a few I think
for a I forget if this actually ends at
40 but we're zooming in on time 40 here
um it might be 100 or so uh at looking
at a few samples between um between
modes one and two
and we're looking at so this is kind of
think of as as more random samples here
and they are eventually going through
the Deion process to to converge to one
of these modes um and we look at a few
samples that have that sort of wind up
somewhere in the support I mean again
I'm being informal here you know in the
region of reasonable probability Mass
versus out of the
support and what you see is
because essentially the way to make
these the place where these functions
are very similar is exactly in this
region here so if you move to a if you
move your samples to this region here
then the the chain of sort of sort of uh
your diffusion chain will much more
accurately follow on the neural network
approximation will much more accurately
follow the true diffusion chain you get
you have the real score function it's
really if you are in this region here
where these things differ a lot and in
that region because you are not pushing
yourself enough to the to these points
here your variance is going to be much
higher of your chains and so what you
see basically is that um the points that
end up here wind up undergoing a whole
lot more sort of bouncing around in
their it's actually ends up being their
estimate of the of the final Point not
just the estimate of the thing but this
is essentially there's a oneto one
mapping between these two so it's it's
not hard to compute not hard to
translate between these two you get much
more uh much higher variance in your
entire sample
trajectory right yeah
model data thats more like what
the Yeah do you still get this phenomena
if you or would that's a good question
actually I I I suspect not because I
think in that case basically these
so that's a good question actually let
me let me let me think about that I I I
something we should actually we should
run I think you would it would not be as
prevalent
there
um let me think about why I believe
that maybe I'm more biased just to
believe there should be different modes
in data and therefore things in between
the modes tend to be hallucinations and
so that's my inherent uh bias that I'm
bringing that's a good question yeah
okay but if you're not in that case if
the data is actually not connected
between modes if it is if it is
multimodal
um in the sense of modes of data now you
can't say multimodal in AI anymore and
people think you mean you know text and
speech and images um so this leads to a
very simple metric we have for assessing
How likely in some sense a point is to
be
hallucinated uh and the idea is you just
take this trajectory of all your
predicted points and let's look at this
variance over the entire sampling
trajectory and if we do this what we
find is we get actually quite good
separation between what we're referring
to again with some threshold here
between in support and hallucination um
we get very good separation between the
hallucinated points here then their
value of this metric and the value of
the metric for non- hallucinated
points so almost all the non
hallucinated points points just do do
have very low variance in this in this
trajectory sampling trajectory and
almost all lot of the H points have have
uh relatively high value of the of the
metric it's of course not I I want to be
very clear it's not a perfect separator
here but it's pretty good when it comes
to sort of understanding uh there's
definitely a difference in these two
distributions here yeah the way you
describe the Fig you go back couple yeah
which to which one this one oops sorry I
somehow I press there's like a middle
button that's this is no no no it's I'm
I'm not used to this thing this it does
VAR odd uh yeah okay there we go uh this
one
Yeahs some of these look like they've
converged yeah okay so so this is a
great point I I want to make one one
point clear so this is the trajectories
of the predicted X zeros and so the
predicted x0 you basically to predict
the X zero you take your current iterate
and you subtract off the score function
actually with a certain with a certain
fraction of it and so importantly here
this is not the trajectory of the actual
noisy sample that will bounce around
much more this is the trajectory of the
predicted xzero you know the D noise
version so what's definitely true is the
samples are non- hallucinated they kind
of know where they're going to end up a
lot earlier and that is much more stable
yes but that's that's an important
distinction there which I maybe didn't
emphasize enough this is predicted X
zero this is so this is this one here
not XT to x0 yeah very important there
because the the other samples I mean
there there's again a oneto one mapping
but but those will always be noisier and
so you have much more just inherent
variance of those things than you have
in the predicted X
zero okay and it's pretty good at
differentiating these
things so again
though with data like this it's very
unclear if this has any real
significance when it comes to real data
I think it's a fair critique of this
whole agenda we're talking about here
because um we know if you look at 2D
data and these
models I mean a no one applies them to
or to 1D data right this is not arguably
that interesting um but then maybe more
more
fundamentally is this is this just an
effect of you know non- lipit or you
know the high lipes value of neural
networks on this one type of score
function which has no real bearing on
what it means to really generate images
with diffusion models it's a totally
fair possible objection um and to be
fair I don't think this effect is the
only thing causing what I'm referring to
broadly as hallucinations in real data I
think there are many effects that might
cause that but the point I want to argue
now is that I think this kind of
analysis is at least somewhat useful in
trying to understand hallucinations we
actually see in real data
and I'm going to do this in two ways so
the first thing I'm going to look at is
for the simple shapes
data are these metrics that we see are
they still useful at differentiating
between hallucinations and non-
hallucinations and the answer is very
much
yes if we take we just you know analyze
generated
images look at those sets that have one
there they are hallucinations right that
or that are not hallucinations that're
you know valid samples from this
distribution I.E they have only at most
one shape uh and look at that
um that's going to be the blue and we
plot this metric that we have here so
you know the the variance of the
predictions along our sampling
trajectory um we get this distribution
in blue if we get uh look at only
hallucinated samples we get this one in
in uh in Orange now one thing is really
important this is not I'm not yet
claiming this is a great way of actually
filtering data entirely because we're
inflating the size here to to the same
so this is these are all far less these
are all scrunched down to like in this
region here um but it actually is not
still horrible as a differentiator the
other thing I want to make clear is that
this is not sort of a notion of the of
the actual spread of the density this is
sort of an this is this is a histogram
of our metric so you get plenty of data
diversity even if you were to threshold
here there's plenty of diversity in
these samples still it's just they some
you know took a little bit longer to
converge some are a little bit less to
converge there's of course some variance
in our in our in our metric itself um
but it's a pretty good it's very clearly
different these two classes yeah how
does it compare to just the log
likelihood if you use that as a metri I
mean so first of all it's actually very
hard to compute the log likelihood under
the under these under I mean computed
likelihood PF right yeah yeah it's it's
it's somewhat of a pain um we did a
little bit of this and it this does seem
this is this is quite a bit better so if
you look at just likelihoods as your
thing there is still some separation but
it's not even close to being this good
we have we we do have that thought in
the paper too I or we've done it if it's
not in the paper so maybe should put it
in the paper but yeah it is to answer
your question maybe I was sort of I
should be more direct it is very
different it is much better this thing
than like than likelihood at least with
the estimators like that we are using
you know based upon the Odes and stuff
like this yeah yeah because you have to
I mean it's a pain estimate likelihoods
actually with these things yeah this
since we know what is the ground truth
out of support or out of the training
data is is not hallucination right so we
want some of those blue guys uh there
because they are actually generalizing
beyond the train this is a great
question so so um
does are these actually
generalizations and the most interesting
generalizations um
I could probably at this a bit a bit
more but but what what I will say is it
does not
appear these samples here do not appear
characteristically different than these
ones here they are both just samples
these on just happened to take a little
bit longer to get where they were going
in the sampling trajectory these seem
very much just one sample we I I can't
visually tell between these ones here
and these ones here so I I don't think
it's like these are the most interesting
samples we have I think it's just they
they there there's some VAR there's some
variance in this yeah is the training
loss goes to zero or near zero um the
the uh let's see so I wouldn't think
um like if it over I mean to be clear
the loss here is the the score score
matching estimators right so I don't I
forget if those go I don't think those
go to zero
um I I mean I think it's the nature of
score function estimators and when you
use neural networks to not go to zero
that's uh they can't go to zero actually
um I don't know if they were somehow
driven to zero would you just put the
entire probability Mass on the training
data would be my thought maybe but I
think even then I I I remember this I
know in practice they don't go to zero
in practice um I also think that uh
there likely are failure modes where you
can have very low loss loss while
effectively just memorizing all your
data that gives you very low loss and
whatever metric you want whatever sort
of loss whatever estimator you have but
um that doesn't happen in practice
because the functions can't represent
that very well because they're non those
are very non-s smooth Co score functions
um and so so you don't get that in
practice yeah see you have a reasonable
heris for balancing whatever type one
and type two yeah so to be honest um
we're not using this right now as an
actual
classifier or filter I will talk about
being filters but what I would say is
the the thing I would advocate for is
not to it's not like we actually want
all of these we get sufficient diversity
here so if you're if you're looking to
for some reason filter your data I would
take basically a pretty aggressive
filter and do it that way because these
errors aren't qual you don't lose a lot
by cutting out this part of the
distribution
yeah yeah think take longer to convert
they're not more interesting I don't I
again maybe I didn't see sort of a more
interesting character at least in these
these examples here to these and to be
clear there are cases where this is
actually still not quite a separate
you'll see one in a second but um it was
not like these were again the more the
the the most interesting samples I
couldn't differentiate them yeah suppose
I just ran it with the true score then
you just throw out some fraction of the
distribution and you're saying that's
okay oh yeah I think that's fine yeah I
mean we could see I we haven't done so
guess we haven't done this case where is
there some horrible bias if you do cut
out these things with a tree score
function we should probably look at that
yeah
yeah right so so no it won't um this
will not change that either um these
things are due to the shape I mean these
things are sort of true even in the
limit of effectively continuous time den
noising and so they are they do not
appear to be a function of sort of the
number of
steps
yeah over um steps in the diffusion
process right yes step I look at theed
Value that I'm you know I'm achieving
and I think the variance yes at each
step you're running a neural network you
know it yes is it interesting to look at
the the intermediate
Behavior objective achieved by
theer um information about how fast
yeah so so typically speaking I don't
think I mean there's usually not a good
loss function at intermediate to noiser
steps because again the law the goal is
not to den I mean Den noising is not the
goal right the goal is sampling from
this this sort of thing and you and I
mean the way these work right the way
you get like your your your final state
is you basically take whatever state
you're in you predict the final state of
it that's the D noiser part of it um and
you see where that kind of lies and to a
certain
extent I don't know quite know what the
loss do you mean the difference between
this point and the den noised point is
that your loss you're talking about or
what loss do you mean
like presumably every intermediate
iteration you're trying to do noise your
noisy image right but but then what's
the you you don't know the ground truth
it's just drawing a sample right it's
drawing a sample so what so what should
be the ground truth about what the D
should be doing can I ask what the
predict
uh predicted image would be or whatever
this is
likeed that's actually what this is so
so this is actually the
predicted time step but I'm saying that
the network is running iterations per
time step right oh no no it's just it's
just the the unit is a single step
denoiser I mean yeah
yeah I mean single multi-layer denoiser
but it's but it's intermediate STS are
not are not interesting
there okay so this this metric appears
to at least be reasonable again maybe
not as a discriminator because there's
going to be lots of errors but as a
filter
possibly
um but there's one more plot I also want
to show which I which I think is very
interesting and before I put it up I'm
gonna give all the normal caveats about
dimensionality reduction and this kind
of stuff I know I know I know people
hate looking at tne plots but I'm going
to show you a tne plot um and I know all
the problems about tne and things like
this but I something think it's really
interesting so what we also did is we
looked in generated images at a
particular type of error this is the
error where you sort of have two squares
in the middle region that are generated
here um and we look now at the
two-dimensional embedding
of the innermost layer of the unit
during the generation of these
examples right so units have you know
there's there an hourglass shaped kind
of network um you look at you run tne on
the intermediate uh ele or the the
middle element of the unet you get this
what I'm showing here is I'm showing the
the the T embedding a TD T embedding of
the of the uh entire set of of of uh
many different Generations here the blue
ones are all generations that end up
having uh one square in them and the
orange ones are the ones that end up
having two squares in them and what you
see is this sort of this this sort of
very nice pattern I mean there to be
clear this is not perfect anymore
because there are sort of points about
that also have two squares in them um
but for the most part What's Happening
Here is this region here is region one
this is the region this one here
corresponding to squares at the
bottom As you move around this manifold
you move the square
up in the space I I I don't want to I
don't want to put too much emphasis on
sort of interpretability of latent
States and networks but you know for
simple problems you can find them and
this is one we found right and now one
thing that's very interesting is that if
we think about this mode interpolation
phenomenon one thing we found is that
there's very definitely some points in
this region here all of which have two
squares so this is not like elsewhere
where there's sort of a mixture of both
of these all of the points have two
squares in them
and they're all two squares are sort of
on the top and the
bottom and there's none that only have
one square in this region so I would
argue that at least this hints at the
fact that you do in fact see this kind
of mode interpolation phenomenon
happening in the latent space of these
networks maybe not unsurprisingly
because again you're applying networks
to these latent spaces they are
lip shits continuous more than the true
function maybe should be um and this is
where you're seeing a lot of the
hallucinations
from so I think that's that that's at
least an
interesting data point at highlighting
you know what might be going on in some
of these
hallucinations last thing I'll say is
this also to a lesser extent I admit
these these these ones are more
overlapping I admit so we're getting
less and less discriminative as we go
along but we see a difference also so we
generated a bunch of hands and we just
counted the number of fingers on the
hands uh here here we had to do it
manually so there's fewer examples here
the rest we could do it automatically
this one he had to just count um again
four hands with more
samples uh sorry hands with more fingers
you tend to get higher levels of our
metric we couldn't quite find the same
pattern in tne I think that this this is
sort of a this is a very nice thing
because you can kind of look at only a
very narrow region of certain types of
hallucinations we couldn't do that with
hands but um I I I I suspect something
similar is likely happening in the
leaden space there
too all right um before I end and I'm as
expected only got through the first
portion that's fine this is the more
interesting portion anyway um I want to
mention a few things a few sort of uh
implications of this to other things so
there's a lot of discussion news is
about iterative recursive modeling so if
I train a a model on generated data what
happens um and bad things happen right
you know so the internet was forever
poisons now uh after chat GPT uh you
know only generated data from now on is
ever going to exist in the internet and
so we're we're all gonna have a hard
time training our next models um and we
do see that in fact so if you take this
process and iteratively generate um
itally you know throw out your data
train a new model and generate data and
repeat this process as you would expect
because you see this sort of smearing of
the modes you eventually get you know
just a massive of barely
recognizable uh density of your of your
points
there
however because we now have a metric by
which we can filter our data if we do
the same thing I'm actually just showing
the sort of the the plots here if we do
the same thing and and um only as we
generate data filter it you actually get
M both you both and I should probably
put a figure out but I think we have
some of them again in the paper you both
um keep your number of hallucinations
lower over time not in not uh Gone
entirely but you keep it lower over time
while still retaining reasonable
Fidelity to the
distribution and so you know we do it
for nness too and for nness you also
kind have a lower FID which is some sort
of notion of how close you are to the
real
data so at least I think this doesn't to
be clear this doesn't solve the problem
of data pollution with Ty data because
this requires you to actually do this
when you're generating samples before
you put them online but at least it
hints out a way which we could start to
filter data that will not be as bad for
future generations of models that we
train on this
data all right so I think I'm actually
going to end here so let me just let me
just end here
um and uh and we can break for lunch I
don't want to stop people's lunch okay
you're but you see can stop people's
[Laughter]
[Music]
lunch
yes picture you show of contradict that
neur at some point those scores are
getting pretty smooth so like at
generation 10 the score should be pretty
smooth already doesn't have
discontinuity so over smthing it it is
over smoothing it yes it was non smooth
to begin with it's just that you're over
smoth yeah so I think at every iteration
you get a smoother version of the true
score function because no matter what I
mean it's so so when there's
discontinuity it's particularly it's
particularly obvious right but no matter
what you do if you fit a function to you
will tend to bias yourself towards over
smoothing it yeah plus there I mean
there are regions here that are kind of
continuous to because in the middle
there there would be those things still
but but yes yeah you you continually
over smooth
yeah uh I guess I just I just also say
you know so so maybe to have one
takeaway of this right you know hands
with lots of fingers aren't necessarily
something that Fusion models believe
just because they generate something
does not mean they believe it again
hugely anthropomorphizing these models
um some of these artifacts could just be
the fact that we are between two
different images that we do believe and
so hallucinations are not just a
function function of the model and the
data and all that kind of stuff they can
also be a function of the sampling
process and we should be I think there's
lots of interesting kind of work to be
done that actually had some other final
thoughts let me just put those up
um these problems I mean these are
highly visible problems AI systems right
these are sort of what everyone talks
about when oh there's hallucinations in
AI models and they're typically not
studied that much uh I would I would
argue I mean maybe I'm I'm over
generalizing here of course but uh I I
think they're often not studied that
much in the and stats due to what's
perceived as the rather ad hoc nature of
these things um and they are exceedingly
ad hoc and I fully admit that um but I
think there's tons of potential
connections and points of points of
common interest and I mainly there's one
sort of possible takeway from this it'
be the hope that I can get people to
start thinking about these phenomena
more and think there may be very simple
problems about just simple estimation
errors that can lead to these very well
publicized very prominent problematic
down stre effects and AI models so
thanks very
[Music]
[Applause]
much in for time if there's like one
quick question and then
break your comment
about yeah thinking if you think of the
thing they believe is the score function
that they' learned they do believe that
the score function than it should be
know trust them to smoo that's true I
guess I wouldn't want to yeah you're I
mean you're right
so the question want I say believe I
more mean is there a internal
differentiator in these models between
points that are hallucinated in some
simple way and and points that are not
that's that that that's and so yes put
put in a less controversial
anthropomorphized sense this is sort of
what I mean yeah all right thanks again
sor